Minor revisions

Comment

The article presents a large scale formalization project in mathematics:
the determination and formalization in Lean of the implication graph of
all equational laws of order at most 4. The proofs for implications were
found using a mix of human and computer generated proofs using a wide variety
of techniques and automated theorem provers. These proofs were then formalized
and verified using the Lean 4 interactive theorem prover.
Additionally, the article also presents results for related questions such as
the implication graph for finite magmas and Higman-Neumann laws, showcasing
how the tooling and methodology developed for the initial implication graph
question could be adapted to a broader context.

Apart from the contributions to mathematics and formalization, the article also
describes a new methodology for organizing a large mathematical collaboration,
which is of separate interest to the broader community.

The article was very nice to review. The determination of the implication
graph of the equational laws of order at most 4 is an outstanding achievement.
I give this paper my highest recommendation for acceptance, subject to
some minor comments and corrections below.

Suggestions:

1. The first mention of the Lean theorem prover appears on line 9 of page 2.
However, the first citation for Lean appears only on page 17. To better inform
the reader who may not be familiar with the tools used, it may be helpful to
cite the relevant tools when they are first mentioned in addition
to citing them when they come up topically.

Similar comments apply to the Lean blueprint tool, first appearing on line 11 of page 12,
and the egg and duper packages, first appearing on line 26 of page 10.

2. Certain tools and libraries appearing in the paper
lack citations, for example:

* Mathlib, first appearing on line 24 of page 10, for citing see e.g.
  https://leanprover-community.github.io/cite.html
* SAGE, first appearing on line 36 of page 45, see e.g.
  https://wiki.sagemath.org/Publications_using_SageMath
* GAP, first appearing on line 37 of page 45, see e.g.
  https://www.gap-system.org/cite/
* The small group library for GAP, first appearing on line 37 of page 45,
  see e.g.
  https://gap-packages.github.io/smallgrp/#citing

3. On lines 17 and 18 of page 11 and lines 1 and 2 of page 12, the authors
note that the "lean4checker" tool was used to limit the set of axioms
used in the project to a "small trusted set". Whenever adding axioms to
a theory it is important to ensure the consistency of the resulting
theory, so more clarification on this point would be good. Specifically, which
axioms are in this small trusted set of axioms used by this project? Is the
consistency of this set of axioms well known?

4. On lines 3 - 9 of page 12 the authors mention that only a subset of
the full implication graph was formalized in Lean due to an infeasible
compilation time. To better showcase this, the authors should include
timing data for the compilation for the full and reduced sets. Is it a
difference of a couple of minutes, hours or days? Has there been any
effort to speed up the compilation, or an investigation of potential
avenues to do this?

They also mention that extension to the full graph via transitivity and
duality is done via external tools. Are these tools correct and can they be
trusted? Indeed, in the prior paragraph the authors note that care was taken to
avoid the use of `native_decide` due to concerns over reliance of external
tools, so it is strange that the extension to the full implication graph is not
treated with the same care.

5. As explained in Section 4.2, the ETP blueprint is a document outlining
the main theorems and definitions of a formalization project, together
with links to specific parts of the formalization that implement the
particular definition or theorem.

The article repeatedly direct the reader to see the ETP blueprint for more
details, e.g.

* Footnote 4 on page 3;
* Line 37 on page 7;
* Line 11 on page 8;
* Line 20 on page 8;
* Line 5 on page 9;
* Line 20 on page 30;
* Line 18 on page 33;
* Line 19 on page 52;
* Line 30 on page 52;
* Line 13 on page 67.

However, in each case no specific chapter or section of the ETP blueprint is
indicated. As the ETP blueprint is a rather large standalone document,
consisting of 27 chapter across 128 pages, citations to specific
chapters or sections of the ETP blueprint should be used instead.

The explicit urls to chapters of the ETP blueprint on
line 15 and line 40 of page 64 should also be replaced by a proper
citation.

6. On lines 6-7 of page 26 the authors mention that the 
functional equations become too complex for n > 2.
Was exploration of these functional equations performed by hand or were ATPs
or other automation developed for the method? In other words, is the mention
of complexity here informal, i.e. too complex for human analysis, or was complexity
here meant in a formal sense, i.e. for n > 2 solving these equations belongs
to some intractable complexity class?

7. On lines 5-7 of page 29 the authors mention that the procedure for finding
a rule set for the greedy extension method can be automated by using ATPs
or SAT solvers.
Was this automation implemented as a result of this project? Is there a lean
tactic or external program for doing this? It should be made explicit whether
such tooling exists.

8. Remark 6.5 on line 7 of page 35 observes that matching invariants can come from
other algebras with a larger signature. Were such matching invariants used
in the formalization? If so, an example might be helpful to demonstrate this.

9. In footnote 14 on page 43 the authors note that the timings presented in
section 7.3 cannot be taken as benchmarks and were performed on heterogeneous
environments. Later on various timing data for various experiments is presented
in the section, but no mention is made of the hardware used for performing them.
Stating the hardware used and making it explicit which experiments were
performed on the same hardware is important for the interpretability of the
timing data presented.

Similarly, on line 2 of page 21, the authors mention that "Performing this
search took 165 CPU-hours". The hardware used to perform this search should be
noted.

10. In footnote 22 on page 53, the authors claim to have found the lowest-numbered
law that does not have full spectrum but does have models of sizes 2 and 3.
The author should provide evidence of this claim.

11. On page 54 lines 7-9, the authors mention results for the spectra of laws
of higher orders, and mention this result will be reported elsewhere. An
article in preparation should be cited here.

The same remark applies to the claims about modules made
on lines 25-27 of page 54 as well, and the extensions mentioned on line 3 of
page 53.

12. Footnote 25 on page 57 links to a json file containing the results of the section.
There should be some description of the format and meaning of the data in the
json file, as otherwise it is not immediately clear how to interpret it.

13. Section 11 discusses modelling the implication graph via CNN's. The main
motivation provided for this exploration is to develop a heuristic method to
determine the truth values of parts of the implication graph, and to use these
heuristics to guide future explorations of the implication graph, for example
to speed up the determination of the implication graph up to order 5.

However, prior to this, on page 48 lines 1-9, the authors mention that
"Prover9 can establish all positive implications between laws of order up to 4"
and similarly that
"Vampire 5.0 can prove all true implications from the ETP".
Hence, another heuristic for determining parts of the implication graph is as
follows: run Prover9 and Vampire 5.0 for some fixed amount of time with the
previously determined optimal parameters. If a proof is found, the implication
holds, otherwise assume the implication does not hold. At least for
order up to 4, this approach has 100% accuracy.

It is unclear therefore, what the advantage of using the heuristic provided by
the CNN versus the heuristic provided by running the ATPs like Prover9 or
Vampire is. The section should make such an advantage explicit, if it does exist.

Additionally, the data presented to justify that the CNN is not learning some
property of transitivity is rather inconclusive. It would be more convincing
if some of the additional tests that were described in lines 24-26 of page 58
were performed, or if the structure of the CNN was analyzed from an explainability
and interpretability perspective to understand the particular mechanisms
underlying the decision made by the CNN.

14. On lines 6-7 of page 64, the authors point out that ATPs were more
effective than LLMs at generating proofs for the ETP. They then remark,
however, that this is only the case "if one restricts to publicly available LLMs".
This specific remark seems to imply that there are non-publicly
available LLMs that are better than ATPs at generating proofs for the ETP,
however no evidence of this appears in the article. If this is the case, and
has been shown in a separate publication, then this should be cited to justify
the remark.

If the remark was simply made out of caution, i.e. to indicate that the authors
only tried some, but not all LLM tools, and so in particular cannot speak to
the efficiency of non-publicly available LLM tools, then it might be better to
explicitly list the particular LLM tools that were used and did not yield
results.

---

Typos and minor comments:

1. Abstract line 5: "all validated by the formal proof assistant language Lean."

This line is slightly confusing. The validation is done by the Lean kernel. The
Lean language is the language in which the proofs are written in, and does not
perform any validation by itself.
Perhaps a better formulation would be
"all validated by the formal proof assistant Lean."
or even
"all validated by the interactive theorem prover Lean."
to match the terminology used in section 4.7.

2. Page 3 line 4: "In this entailment pre-ordering" -> "In this entailment pre-order"

3. Page 4 line 24: "contributions had to be entered in the proof assistant language Lean"

The word "entered" seems a bit clunky in this context, perhaps "written" or
"formalized" would be better.

4. Page 4 line 30: "written in the proof assistant language Coq"

Later on page 17 line 12 the authors note there was a name change:
"Rocq (formerly Coq)". It might be better to make this note on page 4
when it first appears and then only refer to it as "Rocq" later on.

5. Page 5 line 10: "either 820 or 822 pairs"

This is confusing. Is the discrepancy due to the 2 implications whose status is
unknown? If so it might be better to note this explicitly, i.e. the finite
implication held for 820 additional pairs, and for 2 pairs the status of the
implication is not known.

6. Page 10 line 21: "Many of the computer-assisted proofs were also first generated as computer output from a
source other than Lean"

The verb "generated" already implies "as computer output", hence this is redundant.
Consider replacing by
"Many of the computer-assisted proofs were also first generated from a source other than Lean"

7. Page 10 line 37: "containing two words in a free group"

Should be "containing two words in a free magma" according to the definition of "EquationX"
in the Lean sources.

8. Page 12 line 11: "LeanBlueprint" is used.

On page 13 line 22 and thereafter the authors refer to the tool as
"Lean blueprint". Either "LeanBlueprint" or "Lean blueprint" should be used
consistently in the paper to refer to the tool.

9. Page 15 line 30: "leanchecker" is used.

On page 11 line 18 and page 18 line 15 the authors refer to "lean4checker".
Is "leanchecker" the same as "lean4checker" or is this a typo?
If these are genuinely different tools then a citation for each could help disambiguate this.

10. Page 17 line 9 and line 34: "relatively spartan" and "spartan language".

It is unclear what being "spartan" means in this context. If this is technical jargon with
a specific meaning, then perhaps using an alternate adjective would be more appropriate.

11. Page 33 line 15: "versions of the greedy algorithm are useful"

If this refers to the "Abstract greedy algorithm" defined in Theorem 5.12,
it might be useful to reference the theorem here for better clarity.

12. Page 34 line 9: "One source of matching invariants comes from the free magma"

Since free magmas were defined a while ago in Section 2, it might be useful to
remind the reader of that this definition was made in Section 2 in the text for
better clarity.

13. Page 38 line 18: "Clearly the term being rewritten is in ..."

Should be "Clearly, if the term being rewritten is in ..."
